

A quick list of terms that will make it easier to understand the links, videos, and podcasts:

Antibodies-immune proteins (come from your ‘body’).

Antigens-pieces of a virus, bacteria, or toxin (come from a pathogen—‘gen’)

IgG, IgM: immunoglobulin—antibodies

Serology- test for antibodies, ex: dipstick tests

PCR test-test for viral RNA fragments.

Polymerase-protein that copies DNA or RNA

Transcription-copying mRNA from DNA

Reverse transcription-copying DNA from RNA 

#Think of transcription as copying the same language (that of nuclear acid bases—nucleotides).

Translation-making a protein in a ribosome by reading mRNA and assembling amino acids based on those codes

#Think of translation as changing the language from nucleotides to that of amino acids.

mRNA-messenger RNA—a chain of RNA transcribed from a gene in your DNA, that goes into a ribosome to begin translation. This is how the genetic information from your DNA is sent out to make proteins.

Ribosome—a particle in a cell that translates mRNA into a protein made up of amino acids. These are the protein factories of a cell. mRNA is the blueprint, tRNA brings the raw materials (amino acids), and the output is a protein.

tRNA—transfer RNA—RNA that brings amino acids to the ribosomes—this is a special non-genetic type of RNA.

Virion—an infectious viral particle outside of a cell

Cytopathic effect—determining a virus infection in a laboratory sample by looking for changes caused by a virus infection

Plaque assay—one method of counting viruses in a Petri dish/agar plate by looking at plaques (circles of dead cells) caused by a virus.

5’/3’—five prime/three prime—A method using organic chemistry nomenclature to describe the orientation of a DNA or RNA strand. The 5’-end is the start and the 3’-end is the end of the molecule. DNA is joined in an anti-parallel fashion, so that the 5’ end of one strand faces the 3’ end of the other strand, and vice versa. Certain proteins read DNA or RNA from one direction. Bases are added by polymerases at the 3’-end of the new strand.

Cytokines—small proteins excreted by cells during an immune response. They often cause inflammation or recruit other immune system cells.

IL-1,6,...—types of cytokines

Cytokine storm—positive feedback loop with cytokines that can result in an overpowering and damaging inflammation reaction.

Dyspnea—shortness of breath

ARDS—acute respiratory distress syndrome—an extremely dangerous inflammation of all lobes of the lungs. Historically, it had a fatality rate of >50%, but modern treatments can reduce this to <30%. These treatments include ventilator use, sedation, and moving patients into a ‘prone’ position periodically.
